---
layout: post
title:  "DNA Requirements for 16S rRNA Gene Analysis"
date:   2020-06-01
categories: white_paper
permalink: /white_paper/DNA-Requirements-for-16S
toclink: /OCMS-blog/white_paper/DNA-Requirements-for-16S
author: Sam Bullers
contributors: Sam Bullers, Rachel Feeney, Matt Jackson
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
updated: today
color: blue
parent: White Papers
parent_url: /OCMS-blog/white_paper
postid: white_002
---

## Exectuve Summary
This pilot study is a follow-up on the <a href="/OCMS-blog/white_paper/Comparison-of-DNA-Extraction-Methods">Comparison of DNA Extraction Methods</a>

At the dilutions where DNA concentration was recorded as being low, 16S amplification and library preparation (YouSeq) was performed using the DNA from the optimum homogenisation method according to shotgun sequencing analysis and preferred extraction kit.

16S amplification showed a DNA band to 1:100000 dilution, indicating that very low input DNA could still be amplified and detected with 16S PCR. This library was then pooled and sent to YouSeq for sequencing.

<!--more-->
## Objective
Determine the lowest concentration of DNA required for 16S rRNA gene analysis.

## Aims
* Understand at which dilution of the serially diluted community standard, the Nanodrop no longer detects DNA and if diluting the standards affects which species within the standard are detected.  
* Establish a 16S library preparation protocol using a commercially available kit and determine if the amplification of the low concentration DNA samples will allow detection of the all community standard species in the correct abundance.  

## Results
### 16S Library Preparation
To determine if the diluted samples with low DNA concentrations (1:100 to 1:1000000 dilution) could be amplified to detect signal, 16S PCR amplification was performed on the samples extracted by the ZymoBIOMICS DNA Microprep Kit with the Qiagen Vortex Adapter using the YouSeq 16S NGS Library preparation kit (figure 3).

[figure 9]

The Qiagen Vortex Adapter was selected as the homogenisation step as it had shown the best results from the shotgun sequencing of the ZymoBIOMICS Microbial Community Standard. The type extraction kit had shown no significant difference in sequencing output and the ZymoBIOMICS DNA Microprep kit was selected. Samples which had showed low DNA concentrations by Nanodrop analysis were selected for 16S amplification and sequencing (table 4). A diluent only control (PBS), which was ran through the extraction process, was included as a control for extraction kit contaminants (table 4). The ZymoBIOMICS Microbial DNA Standard (#D6305) consists of DNA extracted by Zymo Research from the same Community Standard and served as a 16S PCR positive control. dH2O was used as a no sample negative control for the 16S PCR reaction (table 4).

[table 4]

The two-step PCR process was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, PCR reaction 1 amplifies the 16S region and PCR reaction 2 adds the unique adapter/indexes to the amplified sequences for pooling. Prior to PCR reaction 2 and pooling, the remaining samples from PCR reaction 1 was ran on a 1% agarose gel to determine if a single DNA product was amplified and if low concentrations of DNA could be detected following amplification.

The agarose gel showed that a single PCR product was detected, indicating no non-specific products were generated by the PCR reaction. Sample dilutions of 1:100 to 1:100000, where DNA had not previously been detected above baseline by Nanodrop, showed a single band following 16S PCR amplification. Although still detectable, the band intensity decreased with increasing dilution and no band was detectable at 1:1000000 dilution (figure 10). Both the PBS kit control and the PCR water control showed no band, indicating no contamination from either the extraction kit components or PCR kit components respectively. A single band was detected in the ZymoBIOMICS Microbial DNA standard lane (figure 10).

 [figure 10]

 PCR amplification products were quantified by Nanodrop and equal quantities of DNA pooled for sequencing.
